# Professional groth: Internet and I

Colegue, an analyst, came to our office yesterday and asked for a help with some
Python function. He needed to count frequencies of strings in array. Actually,
he knew an answer, just wanted to verify. And I also instantly imagined how to
write this in a couple of lines of code. But then a thought struck me: hey,
looks like a common need, what about googling? So I searched for "count
frequencies in python" and immediately found a Stack Overflow answer. It
appears, there's a standard library function that almost directly solves the
problem. He was happy with this simple approach, I was happy being of help.

And then it occurred to me: how would this look like before? How I was writing
code back in early 90'th, when I only started programming. How it changed with
the years. Not so long ago, there wasn't direct Internet connection, no Google,
no forums, no Stack Overflow, no reference sites. All these tools has appeared
during my involvement with programming that evolved into degree and career. And
even these tools has been improving. And side by side my ability to search for
answers and the skill of asking appropriate question has been changing.

Basic was the first language in which I gave computer commands and delightfully
saw them being fulfilled. It was amazing and still reinforce my passion to
programming. That Basic interpreter, gwbasic, had about 50 commands. There was a
book, describing the commands and giving basic tutorial about general notions
like conditional and loops and how to implement them. I don't remember any
functions. Later, in high school, we were writing code in Pascal. And again
there was book tutorial together with some standard library reference.

Leap forward to 2005. I was working for wages on some project in the University.
There was a senior developer, who did most the job. She showed me and briefly
explained some code examples, that can be followed and learned from. It was a
web project backed by Java server. I remember myself trying to search in
Internet for servlet and finding some trivial examples and the spec. What is
interesting, I can't know for sure, if this was the only content available or
if search engines were able to find only such or if I wasn't skilled enough in
network research.

Time passed and in 2008 I has joined BrightSource, my first real employment as
a software developer. Work aside with experienced people has immense advantages
as you see and adopt there approach to code writing and more generally to
problems solving. Now it seems such a natural skill to run search every time
there's something unknown. Like unclear error message or need for a usage
example or code snippet for a common task. I grasped that skill from senior
coworkers and was developing it since then. I improved intuition for what is the
common task, grown senses for where better to look, and sharpen query language
for "conversations" with Google.

But I wasn't the only one. Internet also changed. It added larger and better
organized reference sites. It allowed thousands of bloggers to share there
solutions and debugging experience. It gave birth to Stack Overflow - shoreless
resource that keeps growing. And it made Google to improve its suggestions
and results.

