---
layout: post
title:  "Spamspy"
date:   2017-10-22 19:00:00
categories: computers
---

## TL;DR

* spamsum - fuzzy hashing algorithm - is explained
* its properties are analyzed
* ngram system for files' blocks indexing and search is introduced

I have been busy lately with [spamspy](https://github.com/barahilia/spamspy).
The aim was to port *spamsum* to Python, to understand it in depth,
and to adopt it for usage with large sets of files. This post summarizes my
findings and presents the new algorithm for indexing and search.

## Fuzzy hashing

[Hashes and checksums](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_hash_functions)
are well known in computing. They process file to a short signature, confirm
that two files are identical without comparing the content byte by byte. This
method serves well in networking where data transfer takes time and might be
noisy. Hashes are sensitive to minor data changes. One byte removed or one bit
altered and voilà - the result is far off.

But what if we do look forward for minor modifications? What if the task at hand is
to find if some file originates from another after a few edits? Well there is
[`diff`](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diff_utility) and related utilities
but they are computationally demanding and require to read entire files' content
for comparison. They also usually target textual files only.

Another approach is to use hashes that changes only slightly after few edits.
This is colloquially known as *fuzzy hashing* akin to
[fuzzy string searching](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Approximate_string_matching)
that finds approximately matching strings rather than the exact match.
Spamsum is such a hash. It was developed by Andrew Tridgell for spam emails filter.
We are going to see how to hash a file in such manner. Once two files are
hashed, it is relatively easy to compare those hashes: just compute
[edit distance](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edit_distance)
between them. Shorter distance means less differences between the files.

## Spamsum explained

So you want to know how it works. Look at a file:

```
....1..... ....2..... ....3..... ....4
```

How to hash it in a way that reflects small edits? A simple thing
to do would be to split the file to blocks and hash each block independently. The
final hash should be short enough so we take one character per block.
It is also nice to have only printable characters, and
spamsum chooses 64 of them: `A-Z, a-z, 0-9, +, /`. Same strategy and same set as in
[Base64](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Base64).

The algorithm is simple enough: compute
[hash function](https://www.quora.com/What-is-hashing-in-simple-terms)
of all the bytes in the block, get a number `n` and take the character number
`n % 64` from the list above. For example, block 1 can be mapped to `t`, 2 to
`g`, 3 to `H`, and 4 to `k`. Hence the spamsum hash is `tgHk`.

Now make a few changes:

```
x ....1..... ....2..... ....3..x.. x
```

Blocks 1 and 2 are left intact, 3 was edited and 4 disappeared. We get
instead a new block 0 and an altered 4. Now spamsum hash might be `Qtg8s`.
The two characters `tg` tell out loud that blocks 1 and 2 are the same
and everything else might be different.

Yes please, I was waiting for this very question: how to split file to blocks?
Indeed from examples above this is the tricky thing. If the borders in first
file appear at constant indexes, the the second file would be split so:

```
x ....1..... ....2..... ....3..x.. x
          ^          ^          ^
```

Suddenly the renowned blocks 1 and 2 have different bytes and produce other hash
characters. We want somehow to preserve block borders after edits. And here
we come to the central idea of spamsum: same block of data must have same
borders no matter where it appears in the file. This is possible if the content
dictates where to split. For example, any `X` byte can separate
between the blocks. Or it can be a pair `de`. It has the desired property
that the same block `X........X` or `de........de` will be found in any file
and at any location. But... no "buts", yet. Little patience.

The length of the final hash is the total number of hash characters which is
the number of blocks. Since in spamsum we want to detect minor changes it
would be efficient for hash to be a couple of dozens characters long. Too short
and a few edits can touch almost every block. Too long and save, search and
compare operations become expensive. Desired number of blocks dictates another property
for borders: their frequency in file should be a couple of dozens. Clearly specific
strings are ruled out. Spamsum - again! - uses a hash function. At every position `i`
we compute hash of 7 bytes `file[i-6:i] -> h`. Assuming we need blocks of size `b`,
we place the border at every position where `h % b == (b - 1)`. Well, this doesn't
promise exactly size `b`, but provides a practical approximation.

In our examples:

```
....1..... ....2..... ....3..... ....4
----^      ----^      ----^      ----^

x ....1..... ....2..... ....3..x.. x
  ----^      ----^      ----^
```

Pay attention, that now the block borders are at new positions.
But they do reveal the same content between 1 and 3 in both files. That is it.

## Spamsum properties

### Block size and comparable files

Block size defines borders so only files hashed with the same block size are
comparable. The spamsum tool computes and is capable to compare
hashes for the target block size and for twice that size. This covers the case
when difference in files sizes put them to adjacent block sizes.

It should be clear that changes granularity are at the block size level. Meaning
change in one byte affects one block, two bytes - either one or two blocks.

### File coverage by the hash

Actual block size might be far from the target. Since borders depend on the
context, any size from 1 byte to entire file length is possible. To keep the hash
from overgrowing, spamsum has hard limit of 64 characters. Once 63 blocks
were found next borders are ignored and entire tail is considered as one last block.
This means that only the first part of the file is really hashed and those blocks
can be matched in any position in other files.

```
.....................................
 ^ ^     ^  ^  ^   ^    ^   ^   ^
 1 2 ... 63 |<-        64         ->|
```

In the same fashion, with too large actual blocks we may get not enough of them.
If their number is below 32, spamsum reduces the target block size in the hope
to get longer signature.

```
.....................................
                  ^    ^   ^   ^
                  1    2   3   4    5
```

### Edge cases

The first and the last block have context-defined border from one side only
and can be matched only there. If they are moved to the middle of the file the
other border might not to appear where needed. This does not reduce from
their usefulness, merely underlines the fact that real granularity of spamsum is
higher than a single block. A few adjacent blocks should match to deduce files
similarity.

### File's part appearance in another file

Take a file of size 20 KB and block size of 300 B. If the first 9 blocks are the
same as in other file of size 100 KB we can't detect this with the default spamsum
settings. The original tool has an option to set the block size. But in the larger
file 300 B block size leads to about 3000 characters, where it hits the 64 hard
limit. Original spamsum doesn't allow to change this. In the
[Python port](https://github.com/barahilia/spamspy) hash length limit is
configurable too and it supports this use case.

### Compressed files

In general spamsum is applicable to textual and binary files. Minor changes
in few file parts leave many blocks intact and spamsum hash changes a little.

*Compressed files* behave differently. Minor content changes can lead to a very
different file. Most ZIP archives are such. A few modern file formats are
actually "containers" based on ZIP format. For example DOCX - Microsoft Word
documents, JAR - Java libraries, DEB - Debian install packages. All of them are
ZIP archives of a specified structure.

Such files should be decompressed before computing the spamsum hash.

### No guarantees

Widely used hashes like MD5 and SHA256 are very hard to revert. Meaning it is
difficult to find any file having some specific hash. And if two files do have
the same hash, our confidence that the files are identical is very high. Spamsum
gives no such guarantees! Any two blocks, never mind their content or size, have
the same hash in 1/64 cases on average. The more blocks are matched, in
particular if they are adjacent, the greater our confidence in real data match.

Similarly it should be relatively easy to "revert" the hash, namely to generate a
file having some specific spamsum hash. This is due to the fact that border depends
on 7 bytes only and the block hashes are independent and have only 64 possible values.

## Ngram system

Are you still here? Let me introduce a system based on ngrams. Imagine we have a
large collection of files and once a new file enters the collection we want to
check if any its significant part appears in some older file. Proper
requirements: a collection of 1 M files, with average file size of 100 KB and
detectable parts of 10 KB at least. The files might be: documents, books,
programming packages. The system provides means for detection of new versions of
existing files, some smaller files included in others, and some part of one file
embedded in another.

As we've seen above spamsum provides a ready solution. As granularity depends on
the block size, so all the files must be hashed with the same block size. And
the hash length should be set to the file size divided by the block size.
Original spamsum *searches by computing edit distance* between the new hash and
all the existing hashes. There are two drawbacks to this solution: the number of
comparisons depends on the number of files in collection and edit distance has a
quadratic complexity. Meaning, all the existing hashes need be retrieved and the
comparisons get computationally heavy for larger files.

I offer a different approach. This is my own work and the algorithm was
implemented in
[spamspy](https://github.com/barahilia/spamspy/blob/v0.1/spamspy/ngram.py).
The idea is to get all the [ngrams](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/N-gram) from
the spamsum hash:

```python
data = open(path).read()
s = spamsum(data, block_size, adjusted_hash_length)

# ngram of size n
for i in range(len(s) - n + 1):
    yield s[i: i + n]
```

At indexing, save mapping from all ngrams to the file name:

```python
for ngram in ngrams(s):
    registry[ngram].add(path)
```

At search stage, find the file with most mappings from ngrams:

```python
c = Counter()

for ngram in ngrams(s):
    c.update(registry[ngram])

best_match_path, = c.most_common(1)
```

To meet the requirements above we can choose ngram size of 5 characters, block size
of 2 KB. Then spamsum length and number of ngrams are both about 50. So indexing of 100 GB
requires to store `1 M * 50 * 5 B` or 250 MB of ngrams, which might become 500 MB
together with mappings. For search we only need 50 retrievals - should be quite fast
in a well organized storage and much faster than 1 M pairwise comparisons as in
the previous approach.

This solution also scales linearly: with reduction of detectable parts to
1 KB spamsum hash and the number of ngrams grow to 500, storage to about 5 GB and
search require 500 operations.

The index can be saved in any relational DB and can be held in memory - e.g. in
Redis, - even for a quite large data set. Also ngrams approach asks for
parallelization. And the index can naturally be stored in Elasticsearch nodes.

## Notes

Some technical details with links to the Python implementation:

* [FNV hash function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fowler%E2%80%93Noll%E2%80%93Vo_hash_function)
is used to hash blocks, though with a non-standard offset;
[code](https://github.com/barahilia/spamspy/blob/v0.1/spamspy/spamsum.py#L43)
* What is referred by "content hash" in this post goes by the name "rolling
hash" in spamsum. And for a reason: instead of computing the function at the
every point, it "rolls" the result by taking out first byte from the left and
counting one new byte to the right. Of course not every function can be computed
in this way.
[Adler32-like](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adler-32) function is used;
[code](https://github.com/barahilia/spamspy/blob/v0.1/spamspy/spamsum.py#L14)
* The default block size is taken from the sequence `3 * 2 ^ n` - minimal number
greater than file length divided by 64 - to adjust for the maximal length of
spamsum hash;
[code](https://github.com/barahilia/spamspy/blob/v0.1/spamspy/spamsum.py#L74)

And an historical retrospect:

* [Rsync](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rsync) was written by Andrew Tridgell
and Paul Mackerras and released in 1996.
* Tridgell presents and analyses the rsync algorithm in his
[Ph.D. thesis](https://www.samba.org/~tridge/phd_thesis.pdf) in 1999. The
main idea behind rsync is to split target file to blocks, compute hash of the
block and another hash of the context for the block border. Cheap border hashes
are looked at the source file and help to find duplicate blocks. Finally only
non-duplicate parts of the source file are transferred to the target. The thesis
discusses other applications for those ideas, but spamsum isn't mentioned.
As well there is a section about compressed files - small edits cause
significant changes in the archive file. I have discovered the same property of
spamsum independently, before coming to this paper.
* Tridgell develops spamsum, apparently circa 2002 and puts it to his
[junkcode](https://www.samba.org/ftp/unpacked/junkcode/spamsum/) directory.
* Spamsum is somehow discovered and finds its way into
[ssdeep](https://ssdeep-project.github.io/ssdeep/index.html) tool by Jesse
Kornblum in 2006.
* In the same year Kornblum writes a paper describing spamsum and ssdeep -
[Identifying Almost Identical Files Using Context Triggered Piecewise Hashing](https://dfrws.org/sites/default/files/session-files/paper-identifying_almost_identical_files_using_context_triggered_piecewise_hashing.pdf).
I initially learned about fuzzy hashing from this very paper.
